
Ingredients
for the pulao masala:

    ½ tsp cumin seeds/jeera
    ½ tsp caraway seeds/shah jeera
    ¼ tsp fennel seeds/saunf
    1 black cardamom/badi elaichi (seeds removed and husks discarded)
    2-3 green cardamom/choti elaichi or hari elaichi (kept whole or seeds removed)
    2-3 cloves/laung
    1 inch cinnamon/dalchini
    1 single strand of mace/javitri
    a small piece of stone flower/rock flower (pathar phool or dagad phool or kalpasi)

for pulao:

    1.5 cups basmati rice or pulao rice
    250 to 300 grams paneer/cottage cheese
    1 medium to large onion, thinly sliced
    ? cup peas/matar (optional)
    2 tbsp ghee or oil for the pulao
    2 to 3 tsp ghee or oil for pan frying the paneer/cottage cheese
    3 to 3.25 cups water
    ½ inch ginger/adrak + 2 to 3 garlic cloves/lahsun + 1 green chilli/hari mirch (crushed in a mortar-pestle to a paste)
    1 bay leaf/indian tej patta
    1 to 1.25 tsp lemon juice
    1.5 to 2 tbsp chopped mint leaves/pudina patta
    salt as required

Instructions
making the pulao masala:

    in a small dry grinder or coffee grinder, add all the spices mentioned for the pulao masala.
    grind to a semi fine to fine powder. keep aside.

preparing paneer pulao:

    rinse the basmati rice till the water becomes clear of the starch.
    soaked the basmati rice in an enough water for 30 minutes. after 30 minutes drain and keep the rice aside.
    slice the onions thinly. chop the mint leaves and keep aside.
    crush the ginger, garlic and green chilli to a paste in a mortar-pestle.
    heat ghee in a pot or a pan. add the bay leaf and saute for 2-3 seconds.
    then add the thinly sliced onions and saute till the onions start to turn golden brown or caramelize.
    then add the ginger, garlic and green chilli paste. saute till the raw aroma of ginger garlic goes away. (on a low flame, it will take approx 10-15 seconds).
    add the chopped mint leaves and the ground pulao masala. stir for 5-8 seconds.
    optional step - if you are adding peas then add now and saute for 2-3 minutes.
    add the drained rice. stir gently and saute for a minute. add water, lemon juice and salt.
    stir well. cover the pan tightly with a lid. make sure no steam escapes from the sides.
    on a low to medium flame, simmer till the rice grains are cooked. if the water dries in the pan then add some more water.

frying paneer/cottage cheese cubes:

    when the rice is cooking, chop the paneer into cubes.
    heat ghee on a tawa or a frying pan. use a non-stick pan or a well seasoned tawa/griddle to pan fry the paneer. otherwise the paneer cubes will stick to the pan.
    add the paneer cubes and pan fry till light golden. don't over fry as then they will become dense and rubbery. keep the pan fried paneer cubes aside.
    once the rice is cooked, just allow the rice to sit for 5 minutes.
    then add the pan fried paneer cubes and gently mix it with the rice.
    cover the pan again with a lid and allow the paneer to be in the rice for another 5 minutes.
    this makes the paneer soft and it also absorbs the aroma of the pulao.
    serve paneer pulao hot garnished with some mint leaves and pan fried paneer cubes.
    you can serve raita or dal fry or dal tadka with the paneer pulao.

Notes
for pressure cooking, add 2.5 cups water for separate grains and for a more soft texture of rice, add 3 cups water. pressure cook for 2 to 3 whistles.